.. meta::
    :description: The new features, changes, and fixes in Sphinx Stack 2.0.


.. _release-2.0:

Canonical's Sphinx Starter Pack 2.0
====================================

30 April 2026

These release notes cover new features and changes in the project formerly known as
Canonical's Sphinx Starter Pack. For a more granular list of changes, check out the full
commit log.

Bring these changes into your docs:

- :ref:`Update Starter Pack 1.3.0 and higher <update-new-sphinx-stack>`
- :ref:`Update Starter Pack 1.2.0 and lower <update-legacy-sphinx-stack>`


What's new
----------

Rename to Sphinx Stack
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This project was named when the documentation team at Canonical started assembling a
standard documentation toolkit. The word starter felt appropriate, as products needed
their documentation bootstrapped, and we had yet to release a standard. More than two
years later, this is no longer the case. This project has been deployed in hundreds of
Canonical products. It represents a complete standard for Canonical documentation sets,
not just those starting out. So, we decided that it's time for a new name.

With the release of version 2.0, we're renaming the project **Sphinx Stack**. The
repository is now located at https://github.com/canonical/sphinx-stack.


Separate documentation repository
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To simplify the process of setting up and maintaining the Sphinx Stack, we separated its
documentation into a new `Sphinx Stack documentation repository
<https://github.com/canonical/sphinx-stack-docs>`__.

Now, when you create a new project with the Sphinx Stack, you no longer need to remove
its documentation. New projects are also no longer initialized with any configuration
specific to the Sphinx Stack docs. Now, there's less ambiguity as to whether you need to
incorporate new values into your configuration file.


sphinx-llm support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This version introduces default support for the `sphinx-llm
<https://github.com/nvidia/sphinx-llm>`__ extension. It surfaces documents in accordance
with the emerging `llms.txt standard <https://llmstxt.org>`__.  

You can think of the ``llms.txt`` file as an extra sitemap for LLMs and systems using
the Model Context Protocol. In your documentation builds, you'll now see an ``llms.txt``
file, an ``llms-full.txt`` file, and Markdown copies of your pages. The content of these
files is copied straight from your existing docs -- it doesn't transform or summarize
the text.


Dependency constraints
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the past, we've had upstream packages break documentation builds without warning. To
reduce this, we constrained the project's dependencies to their current major version.

Before every future major release, we'll test the newest versions and adjust the
constraints appropriately.


Copyright statement
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We aligned the copyright statement in the footer with legal standards. To incorporate
this change in your documentation, add the license information to ``html_context`` in
your ``conf.py`` file:

.. code-block:: python
    :caption: docs/conf\.py

    html_context = {
        "license": {
            "name": "CC-BY-SA-3.0",
            "url": "https://github.com/canonical/sphinx-stack/blob/main/LICENSE",
        },
    }

For ``license.name``, use the standard shorthand identifier from `SPDX
<https://spdx.org/licenses>`__.

For ``license.url``, link to the LICENSE statement, typically found on the product's
home page or in its GitHub repository.


Ulwazi testing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We invite you to :ref:`test Ulwazi <how-to-test-ulwazi-theme>`, our new documentation
theme in early access.

It represents a leap forward in the user experience, and we'd like your feedback. If you
run into any bugs or issues, please `report them on GitHub
<https://github.com/canonical/ulwazi/issues/new>`__.


Breaking changes
----------------


Renamed the ``.sphinx/`` directory
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``.sphinx/`` directory, which contains config files and utility scripts, has been
renamed to ``_dev`` to better reflect its purpose.

Once you've updated, remember to remove the ``.sphinx`` directory from your project. If
your project has custom code that references this directory, you'll also need to update
these references.


Removed the ``reuse/`` directory
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To reduce complexity and improve source readability, we've removed the ``reuse/``
directory.

By default, this directory contained project-wide link URLs and substitutions. Links
should now be included with the inline syntax or, if used more than three times in a
file, included at the end of the file. Substitutions will need to use reST or MyST
syntax and should be placed at the top of the file. The syntax for these changes is
described in :ref:`External links <reference-external-link-syntax>` and
:ref:`Substitution <reference-substitution-syntax>`.


Deprecated features
-------------------

The following features are deprecated. We plan to remove them in the 3.0 release.


``none`` role
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``none`` role is deprecated in 2.0.

To prepare for this role's removal, replace any uses of it with comments.

.. code-block:: diff

    - :none:`This text isn't rendered.`
    + .. This text isn't rendered.


sphinx-tabs extension
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The sphinx-tabs extension is deprecated in 2.0.

If your documentation contains ``tabs`` and ``tab`` directives, replace them with the
``tab-set`` and ``tab-item`` directives from the sphinx-design extension:

.. code-block:: diff

    - .. tabs::
    - 
    -    .. tab:: Item 1
    - 
    -       This is the first item.
    -
    -    .. tab:: Item 2
    -
    -       This is the second item.
    + .. tab-set::
    +
    +     .. tab-item:: Item 1
    +
    +         This is the first item.
    +
    +     .. tab-item:: Item 2
    +
    +         This is the second item.


sphinx-contributor-listing extension
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The sphinx-contributor-listing extension is deprecated in 2.0. To simplify the header
and footer design, we're ending support for per-page contributor lists in the next major
release.


sphinx-filtered-toctree extension
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The sphinx-filtered-toctree extension is deprecated in 2.0. This extension was part of a
legacy feature and is no longer needed.

If your ``conf.py`` file assigns a value to ``toc_filter_exclude``, remove the line:

.. code-block:: diff
    :caption: docs/conf\.py

    - toc_filter_exclude = ["foo", "bar"]

Then, replace any ``filtered-toctree`` directives with the ``toctree`` directive. If you
find a page prefixed with one of the strings previously listed with toc_filter_exclude,
evaluate its usefulness. If it should be rendered, remove the prefix. If not, delete the
entry and its respective file.

.. code-block:: diff

    - .. filtered-toctree::
    - 
    - 	page-a
    - 	:foo:page-b
    + .. toctree::
    +
    + 	page-a


sphinx-last-updated-by extension
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The sphinx-last-updated-by-git extension is deprecated in 2.0. Its inclusion in the
docs/requirements.txt file is redundant, as it's already set up by the sphinx-sitemap
extension.

Ensure that you have the sphinx-sitemap extension installed and configured. For
guidance, refer to :ref:`sitemaps`.


sphinx-ubuntu-images extension
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The sphinx-ubuntu-images extension is deprecated in 2.0. This extension isn't commonly
used and won't be included by default in the next major release.

If your documentation uses the ``ubuntu-images`` directive, be sure to add it back to
your ``requirements.txt`` and ``conf.py`` files after you update.


sphinx-reredirects extension
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The sphinx-reredirects extension was deprecated in 1.6. Redirects, both internal and
external, should now be handled with the sphinx-rerediraffe extension.

:ref:`how-to-redirect-pages` contains guidance on redirecting pages with the
sphinx-rerediraffe extension.


Contributors
------------

We'd like to express a big thank you to everyone who contributed to this release:

:literalref:`a-velasco <https://github.com/a-velasco>`,
:literalref:`asanvaq <https://github.com/asanvaq>`,
:literalref:`AshleyCliff <https://github.com/AshleyCliff>`,
:literalref:`izmalk <https://github.com/izmalk>`,
:literalref:`jahn-junior <https://github.com/jahn-junior>`,
:literalref:`keirthana <https://github.com/keirthana>`,
:literalref:`medubelko <https://github.com/medubelko>`,
:literalref:`mhsun-se <https://github.com/mhsun-se>`,
:literalref:`nhennigan <https://github.com/nhennigan>`,
:literalref:`odadacharles <https://github.com/odadacharles>`,
:literalref:`Saviq <https://github.com/Saviq>`,
:literalref:`srbouffard <https://github.com/srbouffard>`, and
:literalref:`yhontyk <https://github.com/yhontyk>`,
